# Profit and loss

The other key benchmark that must be set in an FVA is the profit for the developer. Again, as with land value this must be an assumed value, and not just whatever the developer wants. 

The question is what is the minimum amount of profit required by the developer to make that development viable. 

At the core of that question is how much profit does a developer need to show to investors before they will invest in a scheme. At the end of the day, many developers are simply investment vechicles which need to attract money from outside. Before an investor will invest in a scheme they will have a profit margin in mind that the developer needs to achieve. 

##which profit?

There are a number of different ways of measuring profit. The two most frequently used are profit on gross development value (GDV) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR). 

Profit on GDV is simple. You take the total revenue generated by the development, all the sales of new flats and office space, and you take a percentage off the top. It is the developer's sales margin. 

IRR is a much more complex calculation. At the begining of the development will need to pay cash up front to builders to build. In theory it will then only get the money back at the end when the buildings are sold (although many developments these days sell apartments 'off plan' and take some money in up front). The IRR calculation takes into into account the different timing of the cash flows in a development project and produces a single annualised rate of rate of return on the amount invested in the scheme.

To put it simply, if a development had an IRR of 6%, the developer would on average make 6% a year on the money invested over the life of the scheme. 

Another useful thing about IRR is that it provides one number that can be used to compare the profitability of different investments and different types of investment. 

##What investment? 
When developers seek funding from investors they are competing not just against other developments but other classes of investment. When making investment decisions investors have a choice, they could invest in a development project, or they could equally invest in another type of investment, government bonds, shares in companies and so on. 

The decision of where they put their money is not just related to the potential profit they can make. Different investments have different levels of risk and investors will trade off risk against return. They will be happy to accept a lower rate of return if the investment is lower risk. This trade off can be substantial. 

For example at the time of witing September 2016, the yield on 2 year UK government bonds is 0.09%. That means that if you were to buy 2 year bonds (loans to the UK governemnt) today, the return you would make would be less than 1/100th of a percent. 

The reason for this is that the UK government is seen as a very safe bet, governments almost always repay their debt. At the same time the rest of the economy is seen as more risky because of the uncertainty of brexit, which increases the demand for governemnt bonds as people flee to safety. 

The question that surveyors must ask themselves therefore is what is the minimum return on investment a developer needs to demonstrate in order to attract investors to a scheme. What is the profitability hurdle, or threshold the developer faces before they can attract finance. That will be based on a judgement about both the risk of the scheme and the general alternative investment opportunities available to potential investor. 

This is of course a difficult process and the indiviual risks of each scheme must be taken into accounts. RICS produces guidance on this subject, it says: 

>developer’s profit allowance, should be at a level reflective of the market at the time of the assessment being undertaken. It will include the risks attached to the specific scheme. This will include both property-specific risk, i.e. the direct development risks within the scheme being considered, and also broader market risk issues, such as the strength of the economy and occupational demand, the level of rents and capital values, the level of interest rates and availability of finance. The level of profit required will vary from scheme to scheme, given different risk profiles as well as the stage in the economic cycle. For example, a small scheme constructed over a shorter timeframe may be considered relatively less risky and therefore attract a lower profit margin, given the exit position is more certain, than a large redevelopment spanning a number of years where the outturn is considerably more uncertain. A development project will only be considered economically viable if a market risk adjusted return is met or exceeds a benchmark risk-adjusted market return.

However, as the following case study demonstrates, this detailed analysis is not always done. 

