#The land at the shell centre
Savills, this time teaming up with Knight Frank, adopted a similarly unorthodox approach when it came to land values on their proposals to redevelop the Shell Centre.

Again, in this case the developer rejected the current use value approach, and instead chose a land value benchmark based on the current use value of scheme which had been granted planning permission but had not been built. This was a permission which Shell had previously obtained for the site in 2005, an expanded office development which built on some of the open spaces on the site.  

The problem with using this approach is clear. It allows developers to rachet down planning conditions by submitting a series of planning applications. What was particularly strange about the approach addopted by Shell, was that conservation area consent had been allowed to expire and the Chairman of the Shell International Petroleum Corporation wrote to the inquiry that the company had absolutely no intention of carrying out the scheme. If that was the case, Lambeth didn't ask, why was development unviable unless it produced a higher land value than this non-existent, and unbuildable scheme? 

Lambeth employed BNP Paribas to check the FVA submitted by the developers in this scheme. Their report described this approach as ‘unconventional’. BNP suggested some modifications to this approach which resulted in a lower benchmark land value, but the report then went onto say: 
>“It should be noted that had we adopted a more conventional market based approach this reduction in the benchmark land value would have been more substantial.”

In other words, the adoption of this alternative scheme value produced a higher land value benchmark than even the market based aproach favoured by RICS. As BNP were aware a lower land value benchmark provides a more favourable outcome to the planning authority. But when acting for the planning authority BNP did not insist on this appraoch. Why? I do not know, however it is impossible to argue that the benchmark chosen provided the best outcome for the public. It certainly did not follow the RICS guidance. 

In terms of planning policy the approach is also strange. Planning policy has a presumption in favour of sustainable development, it does not have a presumption in favour of any particular development proposal. For that reason if a development is viable then the planning authoritiy should have every right to turn around to the developer and say - listen, if your new proposal is unviable, feel free to go ahead and build the other one.